Add hardware-metrics to semantic conventions (#2518)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/hardware-metrics.md

<!-- tocstop -->

## Common hardware attributes

All metrics in `hw.` instruments should be attached to a [Host Resource](../../resource/semantic_conventions/host.md)
and therefore inherit its attributes, like `host.id` and `host.name`.

Additionally, it is recommended that all metrics in `hw.` instruments have the
below attributes:

| Attribute Key | Description                                                                                                   | Example                             |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| `id`          | A unique identifier for the hardware component in the monitored host                                          | `win32battery_battery_testsysa33_1` |
| `name`        | An easily-recognizable name for the hardware component                                                        | `eth0`                              |
| `parent`      | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0`                |

## Metric Instruments

> ### `hw.host.` - Physical host metrics

Reviewer: What do we think between "host" vs "machine"?

Author: Personally, I prefer "host" because it's still an entity that runs an operating system and is accessible through the network, and therefore has a *hostname*. 

Also, these metrics must be attached to a [Host Resource](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/resource/semantic_conventions/host/).

So using `hw.host.*` sounds more consistent with the Host Resource and its `host.*` attributes.

Note: The most common occurrence of "machine" in computing is "Virtual Machine", meaning that the term "machine" is counter-intuitively more associated to virtual than physical 😂

**Description:** Physical system as opposed to a virtual system or a container.
Examples: physical server, switch or disk array.

| Name                          | Description                                                                           | Units | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key(s) | Attribute Values           |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ---------------- | -------------------------- |
| `hw.host.ambient_temperature` | Ambient (external) temperature of the physical host                                   | Cel   | Gauge                                             | Double     |                  |                            |

> | `hw.host.energy`              | Total energy consumed by the physical host, in joules                                 | J     | Counter                                           | Int64      |                  |                            |

Author: Joule is [international standard unit for energy](https://ucum.org/ucum.html#si), and yes, it is strictly defined as Watt-seconds. It's also recommended as a [standard metric in Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/#base-units). It's also standard in Grafana visualizations and others, which easily convert Joules to the more common kWh (or MWh).

As per Otel general semantic convention, we need to stick to Joules. We would add a comment that 1 Wh = 3600 Joules if that helps.

> | `hw.host.energy`              | Total energy consumed by the physical host, in joules                                 | J     | Counter                                           | Int64      |                  |                            |

Author: Energy counter sensors often report their values in Joules:

* [IPMI](https://openipmi.sourceforge.io/IPMI.pdf)
* [Redfish](http://redfish.dmtf.org/schemas/DSP2046_2020.1.html) (which also has kWh, but which I haven't seen in the wild, except for PDUs)

So in most cases, only 1 conversion will be necessary for visualization 😉

> | `hw.host.heating_margin`      | Distance in degrees Celsius to the closest temperature warning threshold              | Cel   | Gauge                                             | Double     |                  |                            |

Author: Good point, I agree the description is not clear. I'll update. 

This logic is commonly used in temperature sensors to report the "distance to failure" (Intel uses [Distance to TJMax](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/hwmon/coretemp) for example), 

We're applying this logic to an entire host in an effort to easily report whether a computer is needlessly cold, which means the ambient temperature could be safely increased by a few degrees, thus saving energy on air conditioning (1°C higher in ambient temperature means 5% saving on energy spent in cooling, and therefore in carbon emissions).

Example: All your systems have a `hw.host.heating_margin` above 10°C. This means the datacenter admin could raise the ambient temperature by 5°C safely and cut energy costs and carbon emissions by 25% on air conditioning, i.e. 10% of the overall datacenter.

The relation with `hw.host.ambient_temperature` is that `hw.host.ambient_temperature + hw.host.heating_margin` is the temperature at which point you will theoretically get an alert on at least 1 temperature sensor in the monitored system.

Basically we're encouraging exposing a metric that can be leveraged to save the planet! 🥰

> | `hw.host.power`               | Power consumed by the physical host in Watts                                          | W     | Gauge                                             | Double     |                  |                            |

Reviewer: Is this current consumption or total? If total is not a counter?

Author: Power is electrical power, measured in Watts. This could be dropped as we also have `hw.host.energy` which is a counter of Joules. We agree that `hw.host.power = rate(hw.host.energy)`, and that's how power should be calculated. 

The problem is that most vendors don't expose an energy counter in their instrumentation, but a power meter in Watts.

Reviewer: Then is "current power"? What is the correlation between that and time?

Author: `hw.host.power` is electrical power, which is always expressed in Watts. 

`hw.host.energy` is energy, which is always expressed in Joules. It's a counter.

`Power = ∆ Energy / ∆ Time` (Watts is in fact J/s).

`Energy = Sum( Power(t).dt )`

The best and recommended way to calculate the energy consumed by a system is to report this energy as a counter of joules. But unfortunately, most server manufacturers do not report this metric and are only able to report the instant power, in Watts. 

Ideally, developers of hardware monitoring solutions should expose both metrics, even if that means reconstructing the `hw.host.energy` counter (in joules) from the measured instant power (in Watts).

Author: Good question. There is no standard. Power can be reported as instant values with an amperemeter and a voltmeter as `P = UI`. Polling an instant value every few seconds and calculating an energy usage from these values is not mathematically accurate, and we should encourage a joule counter. But we need to adapt to what hardware vendors do, and many of them report the instant power only. So at least, for vendors who report the instant power value, they will use the proper metric name.

> | `hw.host.power`               | Power consumed by the physical host in Watts                                          | W     | UpDownCounter                                     | Double     |                  |                            |

Author: I would be in favor of that, but most vendors equipped their hardware with a power sensor (reporting instant power in Watts) instead of a proper energy counter (in Joules). I just wanted to make sure this case is covered with a "standard" metric and that everybody uses the same metric name.

Also, instant power is an important core metric. For example, a datacenter administrator would like to know the sum of the maximum instant power of each system over time (more precisely: `sum_over_hosts(max_over_time(hw.host.power))`). Depending on the timeseries backend, this sort of calculation may not be possible with `rate(hw.host.energy)` if you can't specify the time steps to calculate the rate.

I won't fight hard for this, but my opinion is that a standardized `hw.host.power` will make administrator's life easier in some cases.

> | `hw.host.power`               | Power consumed by the physical host in Watts                                          | W     | UpDownCounter                                     | Double     |                  |                            |

Author: Geez I can't get my head around *UpDownCounter* vs *Gauge* thing... 
@bogdandrutu @jmacd `hw.host.power` being the instantaneous power in Watts of a system, it can be summed up across a group of hosts. Should it be a *Gauge* or an *UpDownCounter*? (I really fail to see the difference it makes for either storage, querying or visualization)

> | `hw.host.power`               | Power consumed by the physical host in Watts                                          | W     | UpDownCounter                                     | Double     |                  |                            |

Reviewer 2: > Should it be a Gauge or an UpDownCounter? (I really fail to see the difference it makes for either storage, querying or visualization)

OTel has a problem in explaining this--not your fault.

We came to this distinction originally through API mechanics. It would help explain our case if OTel supported a synchronous Gauge instrument. Then I could ask, to your question, which synchronous instrument would you choose? You would choose the Gauge instrument because the number is calculated, not counted. You would set the Gauge to the current power measurement. You would not use a Counter or UpDownCounter to count Watts going in (or out) of your system, because that quantity is derived from something else you could actually count.

This case, where an instantaneous quantity is has units that are `units/second` or `{things}/second`, we end up with something that can be meaningfully summed because (a) the underlying quantity has additive structure, and (b) the rate of time is equal across the hosts. When measurements are derived from time this way, the Gauge/UpDownCounter distinction breaks down, though the test above still applies.

> | `hw.host.power`               | Power consumed by the physical host in Watts                                          | W     | UpDownCounter                                     | Double     |                  |                            |

Author: Thank you @jmacd! I think I have a better understanding of the difference. To decide the type of metric, we need to consider being as close as possible to the thing being observed, not intermediary instrumentation layers that may report the absolute value. I'll review all hardware metrics to make sure they follow this pattern.

> | `hw.host.status`              | Overall operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |       | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`          | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed` |

Author: @tigrannajaryan The [@open-telemetry/specs-metrics-approvers](https://github.com/orgs/open-telemetry/teams/specs-metrics-approvers) returns 404. Maybe this team doesn't exist?

> | `hw.host.status`              | Overall operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |       | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`          | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed` |

Reviewer 3: The team exists. Probably 404 for you because you do not have the corresponding Github permissions to see it.

> | `hw.host.status`              | Overall operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |       | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`          | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed` |

Reviewer: I would personally postpone this. I think we need a discussion about how to represent enum metrics, and if we should have a separate instrument. Can we delay adding this?

> | `hw.host.status`              | Overall operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |       | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`          | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed` |

Author: @bogdandrutu Please see issue #1711, which has been opened 1 year ago, and which is far from being solved, and will require even more time to be specified and implemented. Realistically, we won't get that feature before at least another year.

Instead of letting vendors (like my company) go with their own specific metrics for another year, I strongly encourage publishing this first version of the semantic convention for hardware metrics in the **experimental** state.

**I commit personally to updating this convention for hardware metrics once the *Enum* discussion is settled.**

> | `hw.host.status`              | Overall operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |       | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`          | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed` |

Reviewer: But is not about updating documentation that worries me, is about dealing with the breaking change and needing to built a translator, etc.

I think you have incentive to push for enums to be defined :) and you can work on that...

> | `hw.host.status`              | Overall operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |       | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`          | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed` |

Author: Ha ha! But... but... but this is so blatantly manipulative! 😂

Reality is that @pirgeo and @dyladan convinced me that *Enums* as a specific type weren't such a great idea, given the sate of the timeseries market today. Chances to see timeseries vendors adopt a new *Enum* type are very slim.

That's why I updated the semantic convention for hardware metrics to use the widely adopted format of *StateSet*.

> | `hw.host.status`              | Overall operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |       | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`          | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed` |

Author: @bogdandrutu Okay fair enough. **When approximately** will we get a status on *Enums*? #1711 has got 1 like (mine) in 1 year. People don't seem too excited about it.

| `model`       | Descriptive model name                        |                             |
| `vendor`      | Vendor name                                   |                             |

### `hw.cpu.` - Physical processor metrics

**Description:** Physical processor (as opposed to the logical processor seen by
the operating system for multi-core systems). A physical processor may include
many individual cores.

| Name                 | Description                                                                   | Units    | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key | Attribute Values                                |
| -------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `hw.cpu.errors`      | Total number of errors encountered and corrected by the CPU                   | {errors} | Counter                                           | Int64      |               |                                                 |

> | `hw.cpu.power`       | CPU current power consumption in Watts                                        | W        | UpDownCounter                                     | Double     |               |                                                 |

Author: Agreed, see my comment above.

| `bios_version`     | BIOS version              |         |
| `driver_version`   | Driver for the controller |         |
| `firmware_version` | Firmware version          |         |
| `model`            | Descriptive model name    |         |
| `serial_number`    | Serial number             |         |
| `vendor`           | Vendor name               |         |

### `hw.enclosure.` - Enclosure metrics

**Description:** Computer chassis (can be an expansion enclosure)

| Name                  | Description                                                                   | Units | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key | Attribute Values           |
| --------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ------------- | -------------------------- |
| `hw.enclosure.status` | Operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |       | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`       | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed` |

> | `hw.enclosure.status` | Intrusion status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states   |       | Gauge                                             | Int        | `intrusion`   | `open`                     |

Reviewer: Line 128 and 129 is the same metric?

Author: Good point! We thought of using 2 *Attributes* for the `hw.enclosure.status` metric: `state` and `intrusion`. But I will simplify this and use `state` *Attribute* only.

| `serial_number` | Serial number                                      |                           |
| `type`          | Type of the enclosure (useful for modular systems) | Computer, Storage, Switch |
| `vendor`        | Vendor name                                        |                           |

### `hw.fan.` - Fan metrics

**Description:** Fan that keeps the air flowing to maintain the internal
temperature of a computer

| Name                 | Description                                                                   | Units | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key | Attribute Values           |
| -------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ------------- | -------------------------- |
| `hw.fan.speed`       | Fan speed in revolutions per minute                                           | {rpm} | Gauge                                             | Int        |               |                            |

> | `hw.fan.speed_ratio` | Fan speed expressed as a fraction of its maximum speed                        | 1     | Gauge                                             | Double     |               |                            |

Author: Some fans only report their speed in percentage of their maximum speed. Most often the maximum speed of a fan is not known (not exposed in a proper way). We could specify a `hw.fan.speed_limit` but it's going to be very rarely used.

Following Otel's general semantic convention, we should have `hw.fan.speed_utilization` but this sounded weird. That's why I opted for `hw.fan.speed_ratio` (which is admittedly Prometheus' lingo).

Please note that server manufacturers often trigger an alert when `hw.fan.speed_ratio` goes too low, indicating reduced cooling capacity. When value is 100%, it's not considered "saturated", but simply spinning at nominal speed. That's why `limit` and `utilization` seemed a little off in this case.

Let me know if you want me to update with `limit` and `utilization`.

> | `hw.fan.speed_ratio` | Fan speed expressed as a fraction of its maximum speed                        | 1     | Gauge                                             | Double     |               |                            |

Reviewer: Is this needed if you have the `fan.speed`?

Author: Unfortunately, some fans are able to report their speed only as a percentage of their maximum speed (and that maximum speed may not even be exposed). To strictly follow Otel's general semantic convention, we should have had `hw.fan.speed_limit` and `hw.fan.speed_utilization`. But we can't really talk of *utilization* when it comes to speed. That's why we opted for `_ratio`. Let me know if that is acceptable.

| --------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `hw.gpu.errors`             | Number of errors encountered by the GPU                                       | {errors} | Counter                                           | Int64      | `type`        | `corrected`, `all`                              |
| `hw.gpu.io`                 | Received and transmitted bytes by the GPU                                     | By       | Counter                                           | Int64      | `direction`   | `receive`, `transmit`                           |
| `hw.gpu.memory_limit`       | Size of the GPU memory                                                        | By       | Gauge                                             | Int64      |               |                                                 |

> | `hw.gpu.memory_utilization` | Fraction of GPU memory used                                                   | 1        | Gauge                                             | Double     |               |                                                 |

Reviewer: is this utilization or usage? see as a reference for the system metrics https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/system-metrics.md#systemmemory---memory-metrics

Author: I confirm it's `utilization`. GPU instrumentation often return this value in percentage, and not the absolute value in bytes. But we can add `hw.gpu.memory_usage` (or `hw.gpu.memory.usage`) as well, just in case. These metrics are not mandatory anyway.

> | `hw.gpu.memory_utilization` | Fraction of GPU memory used                                                   | 1        | Gauge                                             | Double     |               |                                                 |

Reviewer: Also I would do something like `hw.gpu.memory.limit` to be consistent with others.

Author: Good point. I was under the impression that we should limit the metric name to `<namespace>.<instrument>.<metric_name>`, but we can have more sub-items. I'll update all metrics accordingly.

| `hw.gpu.status`             | Operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |          | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`       | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed`, `predicted_failure` |

> | `hw.gpu.time_utilization`   | Fraction of time spent in a specific task                                     | 1        | Gauge                                             | Double     | `task`        | `decoder`, `encoder`, `general`                 |

Reviewer: Maybe just `hw.gpu.utilization`? to be consistent with `system.cpu.utilization`?

Author: I was afraid of the confusion with `hw.gpu.memory_utilization`, but with `hw.gpu.memory.utilization` it just makes sense. Thanks!

| Name                          | Description                                                                   | Units    | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key | Attribute Values           |
| ----------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ------------- | -------------------------- |
| `hw.logical_disk.errors`      | Number of errors encountered on this logical disk                             | {errors} | Counter                                           | Int64      |               |                            |
| `hw.logical_disk.limit`       | Size of the logical disk                                                      | By       | Gauge                                             | Int64      |               |                            |
| `hw.logical_disk.status`      | Operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |          | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`       | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed` |

> | `hw.logical_disk.usage`       | Logical disk space usage                                                      | By       | Gauge                                             | Int64      | `state`       | `used`, `free`             |

Reviewer: UpDownCounter

Author: I'm sorry, I read and read again the [UpDownCounter description](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md#updowncounter) and I fail to see how it applies to disk or filesystem usage.

Disk usage is an absolute value and is not calculated as the sum of successive increments and decrements.

But I really must be missing something here, as I see **system-metrics.md** uses that for memory usage, paging usage, etc.

Reviewer: > Disk usage is an absolute value and is not calculated as the sum of successive increments and decrements.

How is it calculated that "absolute" value? Is it not a Sum(+store - delete)? Same for memory is that not a sum (allocs - deallocs)?

Author: @bogdandrutu @tigrannajaryan I'm sorry to bother you on this, but what am I missing here?

Reviewer: 1. I did not say to use "delta" (we should report the cumulative), I said that it is a "sum" that we observe, so we should use UpDownCounter.
2. Read this https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/api.md#asynchronous-updowncounter, if does not help, I don't know how more to explain.

For your example you will report:
| Time | Reported/UpDownCounter Value |
|---|---|---|
| 8:00 | 1000 |
| 8:01 | 981 |
| 8:02 | 991 |
| 8:03 | 1005 |

Author: Okay now I understand. I was looking at *UpDownCounter*, but you were referring to *Asynchronous UpDownCounter*, which is slightly different (no deltas).

I'll update the convention accordingly. Thanks!

| `hw.network.errors`                | Number of errors encountered by the network adapter                                                          | {errors}  | Counter                                           | Int64      | `type`        | `all`, `zero_buffer_credit` |
| `hw.network.io`                    | Network traffic in bytes                                                                                     | By        | Counter                                           | Int64      | `direction`   | `receive`, `transmit`       |
| `hw.network.packets`               | Network traffic in packets (or frames)                                                                       | {packets} | Counter                                           | Int64      | `direction`   | `receive`, `transmit`       |
| `hw.network.status`                | Operational status, regardless of the link status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |           | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`       | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed`  |

> | `hw.network.up`                    | Link status: `1` (up) or `0` (down)                                                                          |           | Gauge                                             | Int        |               |                             |

Author: Okay, I'll update accordingly (and same for all `status` metrics)

| Attribute Key   | Description            | Example |
| --------------- | ---------------------- | ------- |
| `model`         | Descriptive model name |         |
| `serial_number` | Serial number          |         |
| `vendor`        | Vendor name            |         |

### `hw.temperature.` - Temperature sensor metrics

**Description:** A temperature sensor, either numeric or discrete

| Name                                 | Description                                                                                               | Units | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key | Attribute Values           |
| ------------------------------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ------------- | -------------------------- |
| `hw.temperature.status`              | Whether the temperature is within normal range: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |       | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state`       | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed` |

> | `hw.temperature.temperature_celsius` | Temperature in degrees Celsius                                                                            | Cel   | Gauge                                             | Double     |               |                            |

Author: Well, [base temperature unit is Kelvin](https://ucum.org/ucum.html#baseunits). Americans use Fahrenheit. Too avoid confusion, I specified `celsius` as it is permitted by Otel's general semantic convention.

Let me know if you still think `.celsius` should be removed. Thanks!

> | `hw.temperature.temperature_celsius` | Temperature in degrees Celsius                                                                            | Cel   | Gauge                                             | Double     |               |                            |

Author: I totally agree we should use Kelvin for temperatures. I was just arguing that some users may say `hw.temperature.temperature` should be in Kelvin. Americans may think it will be in Fahrenheit. That's why I thought adding `_celsius` would help avoid confusion, as [this section of the general semantic convention for metrics](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/README.md#units) seems to be allowing:

> Units may be included when it provides additional meaning to the metric name

Being European, I'm perfectly fine with dropping `_celsius`, I won't be confused personally. @bogdandrutu @tigrannajaryan  @pirgeo Are you okay with this?

> | `hw.temperature.temperature_celsius` | Temperature in degrees Celsius                                                                            | Cel   | Gauge                                             | Double     |               |                            |

Author: `_celsius` suffix has been removed.

Additional attributes:

| Attribute Key     | Description            | Example    |
| ----------------- | ---------------------- | ---------- |

> | `sensor_location` | Location of the sensor | `CPU0_DIE` |

Reviewer 2: I wonder if hw.host.ambient_temperature can be classified as a temperature sensor, so as to avoid one special case?

  - [`hw.power_supply.` - Power supply metrics](#hwpower_supply---power-supply-metrics)
  - [`hw.tape_drive.` - Tape drive metrics](#hwtape_drive---tape-drive-metrics)
  - [`hw.temperature.` - Temperature sensor metrics](#hwtemperature---temperature-sensor-metrics)
  - [`hw.voltage.` - Voltage sensor metrics](#hwvoltage---voltage-sensor-metrics)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Common hardware attributes

All metrics in `hw.` instruments should be attached to a [Host Resource](../../resource/semantic_conventions/host.md)
and therefore inherit its attributes, like `host.id` and `host.name`.

Additionally, it is recommended that all metrics in `hw.` instruments have the
below attributes:

| Attribute Key | Description                                                                                                   | Example                             |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| `id`          | A unique identifier for the hardware component in the monitored host                                          | `win32battery_battery_testsysa33_1` |

> | `label`       | An easily-recognizable name for the hardware component                                                        | `eth0`                              |

Reviewer 4: Would `name` be a better name? `label` is widely used by Prometheus https://prometheus.io/docs/practices/naming/, which could introduce unnecessary confusion.

Author: True, it is probably better.

| `parent`      | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0`                |

## Metric Instruments

> ### `hw.host.` - Physical host metrics

Reviewer 3: How is the host identified? Do we expect that these metrics are accompanied by a `Resource` with `host.*` attributes?

Reviewer 3: Nevermind, I see it is already answered in the PR.

**Description:** Physical system as opposed to a virtual system or a container.
Examples: physical server, switch or disk array.

| Name                          | Description                                                              | Units                                  | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key(s) | Attribute Values |
| ----------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ---------------- | ---------------- |

> | `hw.host.ambient_temperature` | Ambient (external) temperature of the physical host                      | °C                                     | Gauge                                             | Double     |                  |                  |

Reviewer 3: >°C

Please use [UCUM c/s](https://ucum.org/ucum.html#si) unit specifiers instead of Print unit specifier (e.g. `Cel`).

Author: Oops, will do!

> | `hw.host.energy`              | Total energy consumed by the physical host, in joules                    | J                                      | Counter                                           | Int64      |                  |                  |

Reviewer 4: Would we want Int64 or Double? Asking this because there could be low power consumption hosts.

Author: Good point! 

We need the full precision of *Int64* because we will need to be able to calculate precise difference between very high values of the counter to calculate the power in Watts: `delta(hw.host.energy) / delta(time)`.

| `hw.host.heating_margin`      | Distance in degrees Celsius to the closest temperature warning threshold | °C                                     | Gauge                                             | Double     |                  |                  |
| `hw.host.power`               | Power consumed by the physical host in Watts                             | W                                      | Gauge                                             | Double     |                  |                  |

> | `hw.host.status`              | Physical host overall operational status                                 | { 0 = OK ; 1 = Degraded ; 2 = Failed } | Gauge                                             | Int        |                  |                  |

Reviewer 3: >{ 0 = OK ; 1 = Degraded ; 2 = Failed }

This does not look like a Unit. I assume this is intended to reflect the state, which is one of the 3 possible values, so perhaps put this in the Value Type column.

Alternatively, could we have an attribute that describes the state and the value to show a metric for that state? (This can be analogous to `up` metrics which is either 0 or 1).

Author: It is not a standard unit, you're right. I tried to follow the other semantic conventions in OpenTelemetry, where non-standard units are surrounded with curly brackets (e.g. `{packets}`). I'd argue it's better to describe the possible values in the unit itself so it ends up in the UI (say on the Y-axis of a graph) and the user can interpret the numeric values.

[OpenMetrics recommends to map enumerations to integer values](https://github.com/OpenObservability/OpenMetrics/blob/main/specification/OpenMetrics.md#gauge) rather than attributes for better efficiency. Users seem to prefer that we do not to require the collector to push 3 *DataPoints* (1, 0, and 0) for each OK status value.

Also, see [my comment on this issue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1711#issuecomment-1114303004) 😉 If we decided of such a convention, it would allow UI developers to automatically interpret such enum values.

Reviewer 5: I would argue against using the Unit to do this. In my mind, the Unit should be something that is just read by the UI, and if the UI knows how to display the Unit, it should do so. Having the UI parse such a string and then generate the respective code to show the right thing seems very fragile to me. Furthermore, backends that parse units and do something with them will have to work around the new format. This might be okay if you are developing your backend yourself, but in that case you can use every field as you see fit anyway. I don't think this is a good fit for a standard published by OpenTelemetry, but maybe I am misunderstanding what the unit field was intended to do in the first place, so please correct me if I am wrong. If so, I think we should add a standard format to the spec.

Additionally, using unit in this way would send the signal that it is generally okay (maybe even endorsed by OpenTelemetry) to use the Unit to represent Enums. While your current proposal fits the 63 character limit for unit, other translations from enum to unit might not. The users would then be forced to work around it by adding their values as dimensions anyway, and I don't think we want to endorse such inconsistencies in OpenTelemetry, if we can help it.
Finally, changing the unit at a later time (e.g. adding a new enum value) might need to change the code your UI uses to display charts. Adding a new dimension value on the contrary is a well understood change in the data stream, and is preferrable in my opinion.

Also, maybe some compression could help with the downside of having to report 3 data points instead of one. Potentially, something like the [column-based OTLP format](https://github.com/open-telemetry/oteps/pull/171) could be helpful.

All of these considerations lead me to the conclusion that adding the state as a dimension value is still the preferred method. I don't think Unit is the right place to do this.

Author: Good point about the 63-char limit. Also, you're right: this is just a workaround waiting for a true *Enum* type in OpenTelemetry metrics. See [my comment on the corresponding issue to create an *Enum* metric value type](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/1711#issuecomment-1117349513).

> In the meantime, assuming OpenTelemetry adds an *Enum* value type in the future, I would recommend that developers use a single *Gauge int* metric to represent mutually exclusive enums, as it will be much easier to convert later a single *int* metric to an *Enum*.

Conclusion: the *status* metric can remain as a *Gauge int* until we get *Enum*, but the `{ 0 = OK ; 1 = Degraded ; 2 = Failed }` unit should be left out of the semantic convention, as it's not an OpenTelemetry recommendation.

Reviewer 3: I agree that it is very valuable to have the enum statuses in the metrics. My only concern is that we will add the enums in a way that we don't like and then we will break it very soon when we come up with a proper way to represent enums.

| ----------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ------------- | ---------------- |
| `hw.memory.errors`            | Number of errors encountered on this memory module          | {errors}                               | Counter                                           | Int64      |               |                  |
| `hw.memory.limit`             | Size of the memory module                                   | By                                     | Gauge                                             | Int64      |               |                  |
| `hw.memory.predicted_failure` | Whether the memory module is predicting an imminent failure | { 0 = false ; 1 = true }               | Gauge                                             | Int        |               |                  |
| `hw.memory.status`            | Memory module operational status                            | { 0 = OK ; 1 = Degraded ; 2 = Failed } | Gauge                                             | Int        |               |                  |

> Additional attributes:

Reviewer 4: Would you consider additional attributes such as memory banks / affinity group in a [NUMA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-uniform_memory_access) environment?

Author: I guess any extra attributes okay, but they are not required, like timings, etc. We'd recommend to put the bank number (or location on the mainboard) in the `name` attribute.

| Attribute Key   | Description               | Example |
| --------------- | ------------------------- | ------- |
| `model`         | Descriptive model name    |         |
| `serial_number` | Serial number             |         |
| `type`          | Type of the memory module | `DDR5`  |
| `vendor`        | Vendor name               |         |

### `hw.network.` - Network adapter metrics

**Description:** A physical network interface, or a network interface controller
(NIC), excluding virtual adapters and loopbacks. Examples: an Ethernet adapter,

> an HBA, an fiber channel port or a Wifi adapter.

Reviewer 4: Minor:

```suggestion
an HBA, an fiber channel port or a Wi-Fi adapter.
```

| `hw.network.packets`               | Network traffic in packets (or frames)                                 | {packets}                              | Counter                                           | Int64      | `direction`   | `receive`, `transmit`       |
| `hw.network.status`                | Network adapter operational status (not the link or connection status) | { 0 = OK ; 1 = Degraded ; 2 = Failed } | Gauge                                             | Int        |               |                             |
| `hw.network.link_status`           | Whether link is established                                            | { 0 = OK ; 1 = Unplugged }             | Gauge                                             | Int        |               |                             |

Additional attributes:

| Attribute Key      | Description                                                | Example             |
| ------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------- |
| `model`            | Descriptive model name                                     |                     |

> | `logical_address`  | Logical address of the adapter (e.g. IP address, or WWPN)  | `172.16.8.21`       |

Reviewer 4: Consider `logical_addresses` - a single NIC could have multiple IPs.

Author: True!

| `physical_address` | Logical address of the adapter (e.g. MAC address, or WWNN) | `00-90-F5-E9-7B-36` |
| `serial_number`    | Serial number                                              |                     |
| `vendor`           | Vendor name                                                |                     |

### `hw.physical_disk.`- Physical disk metrics

> **Description:** Physical hard drive (HDD or SDD)

Reviewer 4: Consider borrowing from [S.M.A.R.T.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S.M.A.R.T.)?

Author: Currently, only the `hw.physical_disk.predicted_failure` metric would report the overall S.M.A.R.T. status (as an aggregated status of all available metrics on the drive). But I take your point: we could add a generic `hw.physical_disk.smart` metric with a `smart_attribute` attribute.

| `hw.physical_disk.errors`                | Number of errors encountered on this disk                                                   | {errors} | Counter                                           | Int64      |                   |                                                 |
| `hw.physical_disk.endurance_utilization` | Endurance remaining for this SSD disk                                                       | 1        | Gauge                                             | Double     | `state`           | `remaining`                                     |
| `hw.physical_disk.size`                  | Size of the disk                                                                            | By       | Gauge                                             | Int64      |                   |                                                 |
| `hw.physical_disk.smart`                 | Value of the corresponding [S.M.A.R.T.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S.M.A.R.T.) attribute | 1        | Gauge                                             | Int        | `smart_attribute` | `Seek Error Rate`, `Spin Retry Count`, etc.     |

> | `hw.status`                | Operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states               |          | UpDownCounter                                     | Int        | `state`           | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed`, `predicted_failure` |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `hw.status`                              | Operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states               |          | UpDownCounter                                     | Int        | `state`           | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed`, `predicted_failure` |
```

  * [`hw.physical_disk.`- Physical disk metrics](#hwphysical_disk--physical-disk-metrics)
  * [`hw.power_supply.` - Power supply metrics](#hwpower_supply---power-supply-metrics)
  * [`hw.tape_drive.` - Tape drive metrics](#hwtape_drive---tape-drive-metrics)
  * [`hw.temperature.` - Temperature sensor metrics](#hwtemperature---temperature-sensor-metrics)
  * [`hw.voltage.` - Voltage sensor metrics](#hwvoltage---voltage-sensor-metrics)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Common hardware attributes

All metrics in `hw.` instruments should be attached to a [Host Resource](../../resource/semantic_conventions/host.md)
and therefore inherit its attributes, like `host.id` and `host.name`.

Additionally, it is recommended that all metrics in `hw.` instruments have the
below attributes:

| Attribute Key | Description                                                                                                   | Example                             | Requirement Level |
| ------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------- | ----------------- |

> | `id`          | A unique identifier for the hardware component in the monitored host                                          | `win32battery_battery_testsysa33_1` | Required          |

Reviewer 6: Can you always expect to have a unique identifier for any hardware component and thus make it required?
It should also be specified how "unique" this is expected to be. If it's not globally unique but only _within_ the host identified by the `host` resource, it could be clarified like this:
```suggestion
| `id`          | An identifier for the hardware component, unique within the monitored host                                             | `win32battery_battery_testsysa33_1` | Required          |
```

Author: Good point!

| `name`        | An easily-recognizable name for the hardware component                                                        | `eth0`                              | Recommended       |
| `parent`      | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0`                | Optional          |

## Metric Instruments

### `hw.` - Common hardware metrics

The below metrics apply to any type of hardware component.

| Name        | Description                                                                        | Units    | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key(s)   | Attribute Values           |
| ----------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ------------------ | -------------------------- |
| `hw.energy` | Energy consumed by the component, in joules                                        | J        | Counter                                           | Int64      |                    |                            |

> | `hw.errors` | Errors encountered by the component                                                | {errors} | Counter                                           | Int64      | `type` (optional)  |                            |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| `hw.errors` | Number of errors encountered by the component                                      | {errors} | Counter                                           | Int64      | `type` (optional)  |                            |
```

| `hw.power`  | Instantaneous power consumed by the component, in Watts (`hw.energy` is preferred) | W        | Gauge                                             | Double     |                    |                            |

> | `hw.status` | Operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states      |          | UpDownCounter                                     | Int        | `state` (required) | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed` |

Reviewer 6: Should one only report `1` for the state that applies or also `0` for the other two states?

Author: This question is still open until *StateSet* are specified and implemented in Otel. For now, it is recommended to push `0` for the other two states, at least once.

Reviewer 6: I wonder what makes more sense for consumers but as long as the applicable states are reported with `1` it should be fine. I think we can leave it as-is, i.e., unspecified whether both should be reported or just `1`s.

### `hw.host.` - Physical host metrics

**Description:** Physical system as opposed to a virtual system or a container.
Examples: physical server, switch or disk array.

| Name                          | Description                                                                                                                                           | Units | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key(s) | Attribute Values |
| ----------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ---------------- | ---------------- |
| `hw.host.ambient_temperature` | Ambient (external) temperature of the physical host                                                                                                   | Cel   | Gauge                                             | Double     |                  |                  |

> | `hw.host.energy`              | Total energy consumed by the physical host, in joules                                                                                                 | J     | Counter                                           | Int64      |                  |                  |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| `hw.host.energy`              | Total energy consumed by the entire physical host, in joules                                                                                                 | J     | Counter                                           | Int64      |                  |                  |
```

> | `hw.host.heating_margin`      | By how many degrees Celsius the temperature of the physical host can be increased, before reaching a warning threshold on one of the internal sensors | Cel   | Gauge                                             | Double     |                  |                  |

Reviewer 7: Is this the margin that `hw.host.ambient_temperature` can increase before crossing the threshold? If so, it would be more consistent to model it as a limit instead of a margin, i.e. `hw.host.ambient_temperature.limit`.

Author: No, it's not related to the ambient temperature. It's the minimal distance between each temperature sensor value and its corresponding warning threshold. It's literally the margin available for heating for the system. For individual sensors, it is sometimes expressed as "distance to warning", or "distance to failure", or variants of this.

> | `hw.host.power`               | Instantaneous power consumed by the physical host in Watts (`hw.host.energy` is preferred)                                                            | W     | Gauge                                             | Double     |                  |                  |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| `hw.host.power`               | Instantaneous power consumed by the entire physical host in Watts (`hw.host.energy` is preferred)                                                            | W     | Gauge                                             | Double     |                  |                  |
```

> **Note**

> > Host energy usage must be reported using the specific `hw.host.energy` and `hw.host.power` metrics instead of the generic `hw.energy` and `hw.power` described above, to avoid the risk of summing up overlapping values.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
> Host energy usage MUST be reported using the specific `hw.host.energy` and `hw.host.power` metrics only, instead of the generic `hw.energy` and `hw.power` described above, to avoid the risk of summing up overlapping values.
```

### `hw.battery.` - Battery metrics

**Description:** A battery in a computer system or an UPS.

| Name                      | Description                                                                   | Units | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key(s)           | Attribute Values                                      |
| ------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ----- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | -------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------- |
| `hw.battery.charge`       | Remaining fraction of battery charge                                          | 1     | Gauge                                             | Double     |                            |                                                       |

> | `hw.battery.charge.limit` | Lower limit of battery charge fraction to ensure proper operation             | 1     | Gauge                                             | Double     | `limit_type` (recommended) | `critical`, `throttled`, `degraded`                   |

Reviewer 7: Odd that limit is a lower limit in this context, but an upper limit probably everywhere else. Probably fine for now, but likely to change when #2557 is resolved.

Author: Well, it's natural to set a lower threshold for a battery charge. That's what all instrumentation layers out there do for batteries. I've never seen the battery charge expressed as a percentage of depletion and upper alert thresholds (like warning if 80% depleted).

Reviewer 7: Right. If in the future we replace `.limit` with `.upper_limit` and `.lower_limit`, I'd expect this to change to `.lower_limit`.

| `hw.battery.time_left`    | Time left before battery is completely charged or discharged                  | s     | Gauge                                             | Int        | `state` (recommended)      | `charging`, `discharging`                             |

> | `hw.status`               | Operational status: `1` (true) or `0` (false) for each of the possible states |       | UpDownCounter                                     | Int        | `state` (required)         | `ok`, `degraded`, `failed`, `charging`, `discharging` |

Reviewer 6: Note: Once we have support in our tooling to describe metrics in YAML definitions and create tables it might not be possible to define conflicting descriptions and attributes, so we might need to either add all attribute values to the "main" definition of `hw.status` above (Common section) or introduce separate `hw.battery.status` metrics and the like.

Author: Good point!

| `hw.errors`                 | Number of errors encountered by the GPU                                       | {errors} | Counter                                           | Int64      | `type` (recommended) | `corrected`, `all`                              |
|                             |                                                                               |          |                                                   |            | `hw.type` (required) | `gpu`                                           |
| `hw.gpu.io.receive`         | Received bytes by the GPU                                                     | By       | Counter                                           | Int64      |                      |                                                 |
| `hw.gpu.io.transmit`        | Transmitted bytes by the GPU                                                  | By       | Counter                                           | Int64      |                      |                                                 |

> | `hw.gpu.memory.limit`       | Size of the GPU memory                                                        | By       | Gauge                                             | Int64      |                      |                                                 |

Reviewer 7: Should this be a UpDownCounter since its useful to sum gpu memory limits across devices?

Also applies to:
- `hw.logical_disk.limit`
- `hw.memory.limit`
- `hw.network.bandwidth.limit`
- `hw.physical_disk.size`
- `hw.power_supply.limit`

Author: TBH each time someone mentions *UpDownCounter*, I get a new understanding of this metric type.

Does this mean that *Gauges* are to be limited to fractions and percentages?

@pirgeo @reyang @tigrannajaryan Please confirm that the metrics listed above must be specified as *UpDownCounters* (they can indeed be summed up across devices, as suggested by @jack-berg)

Reviewer 5: The question I always ask myself when trying to distinguish between UpDownCounter and Gauge is: Does it make sense to sum the values:
* It makes sense to sum physical disk size, for example. If you sum the physical disk sizes from two devices, you still get a meaningful number (the total amount of disk space you have available)
* It makes no sense to add together two temperatures of hardware components: just because one component runs at 60°C and another one runs at 40°C it does not mean that your whole setup runs at 100°C. 

Gauges are therefore not limited to percentages (e.g. Temperatures are a good example)

There is a section in the supplementary guidelines about this: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/supplementary-guidelines.md#additive-property

Author: Oh, I get it now. This is not the place to discuss the matter of *UpDownCounter* but this can be summarized as:

* Use *UpDownCounter* for [extensive properties](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intensive_and_extensive_properties#Extensive_properties)
* Use *Gauge* for [intensive properties](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intensive_and_extensive_properties#Intensive_properties)

I'm not sure however why we do such a difference. The ability to calculate a sum on a metric is not that different from calculating the average.

`sum(temperature)` is meaningless, but `avg(temperature)` does mean something and may be of interest.

Anyway, I'll update the specification to use *UpDownCounter* instead of *Gauge* for these metrics.

Thank you!

| `hw.gpu.memory.utilization` | Fraction of GPU memory used                                                   | 1        | Gauge                                             | Double     |                      |                                                 |
| `hw.gpu.memory.usage`       | GPU memory used                                                               | By       | UpDownCounter                                     | Int64      |                      |                                                 |

> | `hw.gpu.power`              | GPU instantaneous power consumption in Watts                                  | W        | Gauge                                             | Double     |                      |                                                 |

Reviewer 7: It feels strange that this doesn't have the `.usage` suffix. 

And shouldn't it be an UpDownCounter instead of a gauge since its useful to sum watts used by various components?

Author: `hw.gpu.power` is expressed in Watts. If we had `hw.gpu.power.limit`, then we could have a `usage` metric, but that is rarely the case (such metric is rarely available in the instrumentation layer).

Reviewer 7: It does appear that `.usage` is limited to metrics where the `.limit` is known. Not sure why that is, because a metric like this really feels more self describing with the `.usage` suffix.

Additional **optional** attributes:

| Attribute Key | Description | Example   |
| ------------- | ----------- | --------- |
| `raid_level`  | RAID Level  | `RAID0+1` |

### `hw.memory.` - Memory module metrics

**Description:** A memory module in a computer system.

| Name              | Description                                                                   | Units    | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key        | Attribute Values                                |
| ----------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | -------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `hw.errors`       | Number of errors encountered on this memory module                            | {errors} | Counter                                           | Int64      | `hw.type` (required) | `memory`                                        |

> | `hw.memory.limit` | Size of the memory module                                                     | By       | UpDownCounter                                     | Int64      |                      |                                                 |

Reviewer 6: Would it make sense to report `usage` or `utilization` here as well?

Author: Nope, as memory utilization is strictly defined by the operating system.

Reviewer 6: How does this differ from GPU or Disk usage/utilization?

Author: Good question!

`hw.memory.*` metrics represent memory modules, like you'd have a couple of 8-GB modules in your laptop. So `hw.memory.size` would be 8GB for 2 instances of the metric. Obviously, there is no concept of free or used capacity in a memory module, as the operating system allocates the entire system memory.

GPU memory management is performed at the lowest level by the GPU (and its driver). The operating system uses low-level calls to the GPU to allocate virtual memory on the GPU for each process. So there should be GPU memory utilization metrics both at the hardware level and at the operating system level. And the conclusion here is that there must be an `hw.gpu.memory.utilization` metric, as reported by the GPU itself, and therefore a corresponding `hw.gpu.memory.limit`.

`hw.physical_disk.*` metrics represent physical disks, and not filesystems. As such, there is no concept of free or used capacity (even for SSD, where it's just a counter of write operations on each block).

`hw.logical_disk.*` metrics represent logical storage entities to slice or group physical disks, and from which storage allocation is done, like RAID sets, LVM volumes, partitions or even filesystems (but that's a rare scenario for hardware instrumentation).

We really want the `.utilization`/`.limit` metrics combo to work together, to be "compliant" with the general semantic conventions.

Reviewer 6: Thank you for the explanation!

| ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | --------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | -------------------- | --------------------------- |
| `hw.network.bandwidth.limit`       | Link speed                                                                                                   | By        | UpDownCounter                                     | Int64      |                      |                             |
| `hw.network.bandwidth.utilization` | Utilization of the network bandwidth as a fraction                                                           | 1         | Gauge                                             | Double     |                      |                             |
| `hw.errors`                        | Number of errors encountered by the network adapter                                                          | {errors}  | Counter                                           | Int64      | `type` (recommended) | `all`, `zero_buffer_credit` |

> |                                    |                                                                                                              |           |                                                   |            | `hw.type` (required) | `network`                   |

Reviewer 6: In the other tables you list `hw.errors` as the first entry and we could keep this consistent here as well.

| `hw.network.io.receive`            | Network traffic in bytes                                                                                     | By        | Counter                                           | Int64      |                      |                             |
| `hw.network.io.transmit`           | Network traffic in bytes                                                                                     | By        | Counter                                           | Int64      |                      |                             |
| `hw.network.packets.receive`       | Network traffic in packets (or frames)                                                                       | {packets} | Counter                                           | Int64      |                      |                             |

> | `hw.network.packets.transmit`      | Network traffic in packets (or frames)                                                                       | {packets} | Counter                                           | Int64      |                      |                             |

Reviewer 6: Please mentioned "received" and "transmitted" in the respective descriptions.

> | `hw.network.packets.transmit`      | Network traffic in packets (or frames)                                                                       | {packets} | Counter                                           | Int64      |                      |                             |

Reviewer 6: Should this say `{packets} or {frames}` in the Unit column or would you use {packets} in either case?

Author: Most backends won't be able to handle different units for the same metric, so we need to stick to `{packets}` (which can be safely considered a synonym of *frame*, or *datagram*, etc.)

Reviewer 6: I agree. I think this would be the first convention with two different units for the same metric key and as you said, most backends will likely only support a single unit each.

| Name                                     | Description                                                                                 | Units    | Instrument Type ([*](README.md#instrument-types)) | Value Type | Attribute Key                   | Attribute Values                                |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- | ------------------------------------------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `hw.errors`                              | Number of errors encountered on this disk                                                   | {errors} | Counter                                           | Int64      | `hw.type` (required)            | `physical_disk`                                 |
| `hw.physical_disk.endurance_utilization` | Endurance remaining for this SSD disk                                                       | 1        | Gauge                                             | Double     | `state` (required)              | `remaining`                                     |

> | `hw.physical_disk.size`                  | Size of the disk                                                                            | By       | UpDownCounter                                     | Int64      |                                 |                                                 |

Reviewer 6: `size` is inconsistent with the other attributes like `hw.logical_disk.limit` (_Size of the logical disk_), `hw.memory.limit` (_Size of the memory module_), `hw.gpu.memory.limit` (_Size of the GPU memory_).
Please use either of the two terms consistently.

Author: Yeah, I agree, but it's going to be difficult to make it 100% consistent with `.limit` **and** not sound weird: `hw.physical_disk.limit` sound weird to describe the size of a physical disk (and without corresponding `.utilization` metric).

`.limit` should be used only when there is a corresponding `.utilization` metric. In this case, it would be applicable to `hw.logical_disk.limit` and `hw.gpu.memory.limit`.

However, `hw.physical_disk.size` should remain *size*, and the same should go for `hw.memory.size` (because as I said in another comment, there is no utilization metric at the hardware level, it's purely an operating system metric).

**But** then we have `hw.memory.size` and `hw.gpu.memory.limit`, which is counterintuitive (and that's why we went with `hw.memory.limit`, for consistency).

To summarize:

| Current Metric | Corresponding `.utilization` metric? | New Suggestion |
|---|---|---|
| `hw.gpu.memory.limit` | Yes | `hw.gpu.memory.limit` |
| `hw.logical_disk.limit` | Yes | `hw.logical_disk.limit` |
| `hw.memory.limit` | No | `hw.memory.size`? |
| `hw.physical_disk.size` | No | `hw.physical_disk.size` |

Reviewer 6: How about `.size` for all of them then? I think `hw.gpu.memory.size` and `hw.logical_disk.size` would not sound surprising. The utilization would then be a fraction of the overall physically available or logically assigned size.

Author: TBH I agree with you, but the general Otel semantic conventions command to use `.limit` when there is a `.utilization` metric. So we're just following that. Again, I agree that `.limit` is not the clearest word when you describe the size of a logical disk, but it's what has been done in many receivers.

Reviewer 6: Fair! I think calling all `.limit` instead would follow the conventions as closely as possible and still be OK. I don't find it too weird personally to refer to the "size" of something as (physical) "limit".
The section you are referring to (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/README.md#instrument-naming) only specifies what a `limit` is and that a `utilization` **can** be tracked based on that limit, but doesn't specify the `utilization` as a requirement for a `limit` metric, right?

Author: That's correct. Actually it says that `.usage` **should** *measure an amount used out of a known total (`.limit`)* and that *an instrument that measures the fraction of usage out of its limit should be called `.utilization`*. When to use `.limit` is not clearly defined, but `.usage` and `.utilization` **should** be used in relation to a `.limit` metric. You are correct that current convention doesn't stipulate that `.limit` should be used when there is a `.usage` or `.utilization` metric. But that should be clarified in the general semantic convention, so we don't need to discuss this at length in other semconv PRs...

So, are you saying I should rename `hw.physical_disk.size` to `hw.physical_disk.limit`? I'm not a big fan, but I won't fight against it 😉

Thanks!

Reviewer 6: Given that the spec is not entirely clear on this and that we already have other metrics defined ending with `.size`, it should be fine. It just stuck out since both are used in the same PR here.
Since the other @open-telemetry/specs-metrics-approvers and @open-telemetry/instr-wg folks seemed to be fine with it as well, I think we can proceed and merge this.
Ideally, before moving the semantic conventions to a stable state, we would iterate over them once again and align any inconsistencies, where possible.

Author: Very cool! 😊
